so I'm off on holiday tomorrow so I'm
actually filming this a couple a days
earlier than I normally would do so I've
got everything grass that like no
massive space news breaks in the next
couple of days that I end up missing by
the time this gets posted so universe if
you could just hold off on any like
supernovae or asteroid impacts in the
next couple days that would be great
[Music]
so first up let's start with what we can
see in the night sky in the next month
so one thing that I want you guys to
look out for this month on Friday April
26 the Terminator on the moon which is
like the line that separates where the
sun's light is and where the sun's light
isn't so the day and night side of the
Moon is gonna be right across at one of
their famous crater which you probably
recognize from images of the moon as
that crater where there's lots of bright
white lines coming out of it sort of in
the bottom half of the moon in the
Northern Hemisphere and the top half of
the moon and the southern hemisphere and
what those bright white strands are is
basically the material that was thrown
out in the impact of some asteroid that
hit the moon about 108 million years ago
so this crater is about five kilometers
deep but about 85 kilometers wide you
could actually fit the entirety of
London of the m25 ring inside of that
crater quite comfortably so it's called
Tycho's crater and with the fact that
the Terminator is on the crater on
Friday it means that it throws it into
really sharp really if you know how kind
of like shadows a lengthened sunrise and
sunset amazing you can see the crater in
a lot more detail and you should be able
to see it just with binoculars or if you
have a small telescope at home as well
break those out have a look at the moon
and see if you can spot it then on the
week around the 7th of May the eita
aquarius meteor shower is going to be
hitting its peak so this is one of the
meteor shower is one of two actually
that's caused by the trail left over by
Halley's Comet as it orbits the Sun the
other one being the Orionids in October
and this is going to be particularly
spectacular for those of you in the
southern hemisphere where you should see
about 60 meteors an hour or so whereas
people in the north maybe it's like 30
meteors an hour so if it's named after
the point on the sky where the meteors
appear to come from so it's in the
constellation of Aquarius it seems to be
near the star that we refer to as e to
the seventh Greek letter alphabet so
your final stars and constellations are
basically named in order of their
brightness so Alpher the first search of
the Greek alphabet will be the brightest
star and then Beta Gamma Delta
cetera until you get to eater basically
what you want to do to have a good
chance of catching them is sort of lie
down with your head sort of pointing
towards wherever AK where it's ears on
the sky then you should have a good
chance of seeing them the peak is
supposed to be around sort of like 2:00
3:00 a.m. sort of in the morning so you
have to sort of get up early or maybe
stay up late depending on your schedule
but all the astronomers say that this is
one of the best meteor showers of the
year for them down there so really do
keep a look out of it also on May 7th
something a little bit easier to spot in
the evening sky is that the Moon and
Mars are actually gonna come really
close together so about three degrees or
about six sort of thumb widths in the
sky apart and it's a good chance to spot
Mars as well then later in the month as
we get to like may 20th May 22nd there's
gonna be a really cool site in the early
morning sky where you're going to have
the moon passing between Jupiter and
Saturn as it moves across the sky each
morning and then again for those of you
in the southern hemisphere this time
sort of southern Africa you guys are
gonna have the best view of actually the
moon occulting Saturn it means it's
actually gonna pass over Saturn in the
night sky sort of between like 20 past
10 and 10 past 11:00 in the evening so
make sure you look out for that if
you're in the right area
as always if you do go observing this
month and you manage to get some shots
it meets your showers or nebulae or
planets whatever it is send them my way
because I've always loved to see them
moving on though let's chat about what
actually happened in space news this
past month
[Music]
now the obvious thing that I can talk
about is obviously the event horizon
telescope releasing the first ever image
of material around a black hole which
was momentous it was absolute incredible
I already made a video on just that
though from last week so if you haven't
caught that video yet make sure you go
watch it I'll link it up in a card atop
the other big black hole news this month
was from the LIGO and Virgo teams which
are the teams that are looking after
these huge big gravitational wave
detectors one in the US and one in Italy
and on April 8th with the first public
alert that a candidate black hole black
hole merger had been detected by the
LIGO and Virgo team so they've set this
up as a website and as an app that you
can even get notifications from that
within a couple of minutes of detection
it will alert you to say we have a
candidate which is most likely either a
black hole black hole merger or a
neutron star neutron star merger or even
a black hole neutron star merger and
from that people can then do follow-up
observations so it's important to note
that these are just candidates only more
detail will come from further study and
from further vetting of each of the
candidates but what the alert does give
is the most probable location on the sky
that the gravitational waves came from
so that people can do more follow-up
observations so they can look and see if
anything was seen in the optical or the
x-ray or gamma rays or radio bursts that
can coincide with that detection of
gravitational waves so something similar
to what happens with supernova or gamma
ray bursts alerts that we currently have
set up as well I think it will help
better understand these objects and move
those away from the regime where you
know you have a specific team that only
they know the information and they hold
all the cards and when they're ready
they release it to the public to very
much a sort of global collaborative way
of working where we can get astronomers
all around the world following up on
these alerts and we can hopefully learn
more about these mergers first though I
want to talk about the Bereshit craft
which was the Israel mission to land on
the moon launched back in February and
instead of take
the normal four days to get to the moon
sort of a straight shot for the moon did
it pretty low cost so it sort of
piggybacked on another rocket that was
launching some satellites into orbit and
so instead what it did was like for
ever-increasing orbits around the earth
until it got close enough to the moon to
enter moon orbit the idea was that this
whole mission would keep costs down as
well so it was due to do a soft landing
on the moon which is where you basically
fall to the moon's surface and then at
the last minute you fire your engines
and then you give it thrust upwards
which slows the craft down so that it
can sort of bump down to the surface I
didn't really go to plan though so first
up there was like a technical glitch
that caused the onboard systems to shut
the engine off for some reason and so
people were scrambling to try and get
the engine back up and running again in
time to fire it so that you know they
could do this soft landing but then
unfortunately as soon as they got it
back online there was in a
communications failure so they couldn't
actually communicate with the craft to
tell it to turn its engine back on and
fire the thrusters for its soft landing
so instead it crashed into the surface
about 300 miles an hour
sort of an angle of 8 degrees which is a
shame because it was supposed to be
investigating you know the moon's
magnetic field or lack thereof magnetic
field and and what implications that has
for the formation and geology of the
earth as well the impact shoulda left a
fairly sizable crater though because
there's quite a hefty Lander about 150
kilograms so it should left about like a
3 to 5 meter crater on the moon so I
think people are hoping that the lunar
reconnaissance orbiter which is one of
NASA's satellites in orbit around the
moon that can take pictures of the
surface should be able to catch a
glimpse of the crash site we'll just
have to wait and see if there's anything
released in the coming months so a
little bit closer to home it now I want
to talk about this resort suggesting
that we can no longer detect methane on
Mars so don't know if people remember
this but back in 2013 the Curiosity
rover and the Mars Express satellite
simultaneously detected a load of
methane coming from the gale crater on
Mars
curiosity even detected that it was like
this seasonal trainer in the summer you
had more me
Thayne and in the winter you had less
methane detected now people got really
excited about this because methane at
least on earth like the majority of it
comes from living organisms and in
particular like livestock as well from
like bits farts from livestock and the
rest of the methane on earth comes from
industry and then also volcanic activity
as well and we know Mars isn't actually
that volcanic Li active so people got
excited about this meeting because it
suggests well maybe it's coming from
life like it is on earth maybe it could
just be coming from the rocks cora blurb
and their collaborators this month
published a paper showing that with the
ESO trace gas orbiter satellite they
were barely able to detect anything like
nowhere near the amounts that curiosity
and Mars Express had detected a couple
of years ago it was about a hundred
times less in fact almost like naught
point naught 5 parts per billion per
volume so raises the question of like
where did that methane go you know
assuming that there's no error in the
analysis or in the measurements taken
for example which I'm sure the team sort
of triple-checked before that they
publish this work we have to consider
whether the methane has somehow been
removed from the Martian atmosphere
incredibly quickly so we know that
methane will eventually get broken down
by sunlight in the atmosphere over time
but over like centuries rather than sort
of the years that we're seeing in this
study so the author said there must be
some yet unknown mechanism for removing
methane from the atmosphere or somehow
maybe locking it back into rocks that we
don't know of yet now perhaps it was
actually something to do with the
planet-wide dust storm that killed off
opportunity last year as well so if Abel
led by van Daele a tower which is sort
of the same group as the previous paper
looked at the water vapor levels in the
atmosphere during the dust storm as well
and saw that they massively spiked over
a number of days as the dust storm bill
so if you can change that level that
quickly then there's an argument for
saying well maybe you can change the
methane on a similar timescale as well
so further work is definitely gonna be
done on this because it's a really
interesting puzzle you know everyone is
fascinated by Mars and so I think
there's gonna be a lot more observations
especially as
the seasons progress on Mars as well to
see if maybe the trace gas orbiter does
detect a change from the coming season
but we shall see
okay and now on to a new candidate for
the closest exoplanet to earth so that
title is currently held by Proxima
Centauri B so Proxima Centauri is the
closest star to earth it's a in a triple
star system that we call Alpha Centauri
and B was the first planet detected
around it so I get the designation B
because the star is a so the planet is B
it's very similar in size the earth but
it orbits a lot closer to its star than
we do about 5% of the Earth's Sun
distance means it only takes about 11
days to go around it but because Proxima
Centauri is a red dwarf star it's a lot
cooler than the Sun so it's actually in
its habitable zone the Goldilocks zone
around the star where you could get life
and you have sort of ambient
temperatures for life as well problem is
we don't think it's actually habitable
because you could have quite a large
pressure in terms of the radiation given
off by the star as well that could
actually sort of sweep away atmospheres
and also has very high radiation levels
on the planet now the 12th of April
there's a conference going on in
California where a group of astronomers
announced that they had detected a
second candidate planet around Proxima
Centauri this is Proxima Centauri C
because it's the second planet detected
around it there's only a candidate now
because it's only been detected with one
method of exoplanet detection you know
you need a second one to follow up and
confirm that it is actually there so
this was detected using the wobble
method where the center of mass of the
star won't actually be in its very
center because of the presence of the
planet itself so it sort of wobbles as
it as it sort of goes around in the sky
and you can detect a tiny little Doppler
shift coming from That star the best
properties that we can get though for
this exoplanet candidate then it's about
six times the size of Earth which should
we call a super-earth and it takes about
five years to orbit its star top Proxima
Centauri which means that it's orbiting
at quite a large distance away from its
star so it's not in the habitable zone
anymore they think the temperature on
the planet is about minus 230 degrees
centigrade so it doesn't have the same
kind of like always at habitable
as Proxima Centauri B planet does so if
Proxima Centauri C does turn out to be a
confirmed planet it means that it would
actually overtake Proxima Centauri B on
its orbit and then be in contention for
the title of the closest exoplanet to
earth which in my book is pretty
exciting alright so that was this month
night Sky News hopefully nothing
happened in the next couple of days that
we missed some massive piece of space
news this was the last thing that I have
to do before I go on holiday tomorrow so
I am that definitely means that it is a
pub time why is someone bell ringing
while I'm filming I really hope you
can't hear those church bells on the
video because I'm just gonna have to
talk through them because they are
endless it's gonna go on for half an
hour someone's gonna ring bells for half
an hour oh my god the church bells have
stopped yay oh my gosh that was actually
so distracting move methane from the
atmosphere all the bells have started
again Oh quite a Becky what how are you
still going you know got tired arms by
now so the Curiosity rover and the Mars
Express all I got this started again do
you know what I'm gonna open this window
so you can just hear how loud these
fricking bells are listen
[Music]
cathedral bells get in the way a science
you